---
layout: page
title: "About Me"
date: 2015-08-25 16:00
comments: true
sharing: true
footer: true
---

It's been quite a while since my days learning programming languages by myself
with the sole intention to develop a videogame, of course I didn't event know
what did the word "develop" mean back in those days.

The years went on, I was just a teenager in that time and I really thought at
some point it would be easy to program my first game, a natural thing. I was
wrong. It's still hard nowadays, and there are lots of frameworks to facilitate
the process of creating videogames. Back then was plainly impossible without a
big team. Not at least the kind of games I wanted to create.

Years later I started the university thinking I was going to become a
programmer. Besides videogames I show interest in hacking and security, but I'm
a long way to be an expert in that. I like logic, computability theory, and
enjoy coding for hobby. For the last 4 years I've been a Python developer
although I also programmed in C or C++ from time to time. Now, however, I've
been trying new stuffs with Scala and JavaScript, just for a change, and I've
been abandoning other tools since then. I'm also a regular user of scripting
languages like BASH, AWH or Perl. I get bored fairly easy, so I try to learn new
things and experiment different technologies every time I can.

I have a degree in Computer Sciences which I obtained in 2013. And in the
present time I'm a kind of hybrid between a Computer Scientist and a Linguist.
I'm a Computer Sciences PhD. Student at FaMAF in Córdoba, Argentina. I'm
currently a researcher in the areas of Statistical Natural Language Processing,
particularly Machine Learning for NLP, and Semantic Web technologies.

<!-- Not all about me is on computers. I also enjoy reading.
Jorge Luis Borges, Stephen King, Julio Cortázar, J. K. Rowling, Jack London,
Philip K. Dick. From the popular ones to the critically acclaimed. As long as
the reading is interesting enough. -->
